Afternoon.
Good afternoon.
Welcome to the Private Production Select Committee for
Scrutiny. Uh, guess, guess
what we normally do is, uh, few minutes for introduction and,
and a bit of a recap of the year's activities and
then the committee's bursting to ask questions.
And we'd be happy to answer them, so thank you, Chair. Shall I get started?
Yes. Away you go.
Uh, I'm Peter Landon-Lane, the chair of Asure Quality.
Uh, with me is Chief Executive Kim Bellinger and Chief Operating
Officer, which also covers CFO, Jeremy Hood.
Uh, I'll make a few brief comments about just to kind of recap who we
are, um, the past year's performance, couple of highlights out of that and
Kim will sort of add some, some further comments. But we'll keep it brief.
Asure Quality provides testing, inspection and auditing
services that underpin the, uh, trust and
assurance in New Zealand food and primary product
safety and quality, uh, both for the domestic market but a
very strong emphasis on export markets, products that are gonna be exported
that need to meet, um, regulations for market
access or, or, um, compliance in those markets.
But also, um, pro- customer requirements, um,
and, and ultimately consumer expectations.
Uh, about, we've got over, um, 6,000 customers
in New Zealand. Um, about half of our business is, um,
auditing and inspection, and about a third of it is, is our food
testing in our six laboratories up and down the country.
As a state-owned enterprise, um, our income is earned
just solely from the provision of those services on a commercial
basis. Um, and w- so we don't receive
any operating or capital appropriations, uh, from, from
government. We, so we operate on a, on a fully
commercial basis, um, but also very contestable.
So we've, there are a number of other firms, both
multinationals and local firms operating in all the different sectors that we
operate in that give our customers or New Zealand, um, food
and primary product companies, um, choices.
Uh, our financial performance in the, uh, year ending June
'25. Um, we had a, um, a modest increase in
revenue, um, 234 million in the year.
Just slightly up on the, the previous year and that was on the back of,
of strong performance in our core business of, uh, testing,
inspection and auditing services, which offset some
reduction in revenue from biosecurity and some animal health
activities. Um, profit was
9.3 million. That was, uh, a good, healthy improvement on the 3.8 million of
the previous year where we faced a number of one-off, uh, effects.
Um, and that reflected that, that, uh, trading performance in our core business.
But also, um, improvements in productivity and, and a strong focus
on cost which was something we've been working on, uh, as we adjust to
the sort of ebbs and flows of the different sectors that we work with and
for. Um, in line with our, our
strategy, um, we've been in a period of quite
significant investment, um, in facilities,
automation and technology, um,
to bring a lot of those things up to speed.
But also with the aim of improved productivity to enable cost-efficient
delivery of services. But also, um, keeping up with offering new
products and services as market and customer demands evolve in
the, in the food industry.
Uh, couple of highlights there were the, uh, implementation of a new audit
management system which gives us a lot of efficiencies and speed in responding to
customers.
Um, and completion of a major upgrade of our, uh, information
technology including our data capabilities which then make it a lot
more seamless for us to be able to offer integrated services
to, to our customers. Um, the biggest investment we're
making at the moment, uh, and once in a generation sort of thing
is the upgrade to our Auckland, uh, food
testing laboratory. Um, that was first built in,
um, 1980 and I think there was about 80 people there at the time.
There's 450 people now and as the, the New Zealand food industry has
grown, um, we've, we've needed to, to keep up with that demand and,
and keep servicing it with the sort of tight turnaround times that are required to
clear exports in a very time-efficient way.
So pleased to report that we completed the first stage of that, uh,
on time, under budget, uh, and in full in, in the, well,
just af- after the year just gone. So we completed that in July and we're
on track to complete the final stages of that over the next 18
months and, uh, confident of our ability to, to execute
that in a sort of a fiscally responsible
way. Um, the,
these investments, uh, were funded from an increase in debt which you,
you would see in, in our financials.
Um, and, um, and also reinvestment of retained
earnings, and as we get through this, uh, period of,
of, uh, increased investment, periodic
investment, um, over the next year or so, we would
expect to be in a position to return to, um, the
regular payment of dividends to the government as their shareholder.
So Kim, if you'd like to add a few comments, sure.
Thank you. As Peter mentioned, uh, our financial performance was
fairly good last year with increased revenue from our core
activities. And this was despite, um,
increased competition in the market and a rather subdued market in New
Zealand. So that was good. We also, um, are very
pleased, um, with our
strong service to customers reflected in our, um,
in our KPIs around turnaround times for our laboratory service on time
and our quality measures. And we believe that's what's led to
increased, uh, customer retention, renewal of
contracts, um, even despite the competition.
So we've got about a 99% retention of, of our
customers.As Peter mentioned, the increased profit, that came from that
really strong customer focus on, and, um, also our
good cost management. We also had a
sustainable steady increase in employee engagement,
EMPS, over the past five years and we've really
reduced our turnover, almost halved our turnover, um, which
also in turn reduces cost of complexity and
training. We were Health and Safety finalists this year at
Safeguard Awards and, um, we've really ramped up
our critical risk vi- visible leadership and we have (clears throat) close to
100 frontline empowered health and safety reps who
really help us, um, ensure we've got work commission versus work
done under control. That resulted in,
um, versus the previous year, 17%, uh,
reduction in lost, um, time and days and a
20% reduction in the cost of claims from injuries.
So, um, really good evidence of our health and safety
journey. Looking to the future, we're gonna continue to focus on what our
customers need, that's New Zealand food and primary, um,
exporters and making sure that, um, we strengthen
our products, uh, for them, adding new features but also
ensuring we're driving efficiencies using digital, um, AI
automation. And some examples of that are future meat inspection
using camera imagery and AI, uh, for meat inspection, optical sorter
for seed inspection, and Peter mentioned what we're doing at the
Auckland Lynfield Laboratory in terms of making space for
automation of procedures and, um, increasing our turnaround times for
customers out of that lab. So, that, with these
investments, we think the, we're in a good place to remain
relevant, um, as times change, um, over time and support the
growth of New Zealand's $70 billion food and beverage
industry. I think he would like to hear any questions you might
have.
Jo. We're going to Jo first.
Oh, thank you. Um, I just wanted to, um,
ask a question with regard to the, um,
staff, um, reduction in staff that you've
had.
Mm-hmm.
And I note that there were 61
roles
that were affected in the biosecurity and field
services
space, and I just wanted to know how that fits in and works with the
likes of the TB testing and all those sorts of things that you help to
undertake, um, and if that, if we'll
continue to have that service, if it's not through you, through someone
else to ensure that this, it's not something that gets away on us
again.
Thanks, Jo. Uh, these are contracts
that we used to deliver against.
Yeah.
Uh, so Osprey ran the TB, um, contract and we
contracted services back to Osprey.
We transitioned that work to Osprey themselves, who have taken that
on, and some of our people went across-
Right.
... our standard operating procedures we provided as well and made sure that that
transition went really well so that, um, took place in June.
Um, so we're pretty confident they've got all they need from us to
run that TB testing which is really important for NZ.
Okay. Yeah. Thank you.
We, we also did, um, make sure that we retained institutional
knowledge-
(clears throat)
... and some key capabilities because, um, you know, some of the
decrease in, in activity on our part is because what's good for New
Zealand is we've got on top of different incursions over time, it comes and
goes.
Yeah.
So we need to be able to sort of breathe in and breathe out and, and be
ready to, you know, to, um, stand up a response
under MPI-
Mm-hmm.
... as, as they would take the lead on those sort of things.
Thank you.
So what was the net impact of
the, uh, loss of that contract for the, of
Osprey taking over? Do you know?
Does anyone remember that?
Yeah, abou- about $10 million revenue.
Yeah.
Thank you. Uh, we're moving now to Rachel.
Oh, thank you. Uh, so, so I understand that AsureQuality
does most meat inspections, uh, but some processors, there's
about 17% that are done by processors.
And so if that changed, what, what would the impacts
and, 'cause obviously MPI's consulting on this at the
moment, what would the impacts be on
AsureQuality?
Um, a couple of things and, and I'll, I'll get Kim to, um, fill in with some of the
detail because she's been very much involved in the, the, the working
groups that, uh, that MPI have convened to, to look at
that. Um,
the way... So there's a, a draft, um, change of the
export notice, the rules, that's out for consultation so that's a matter
of public knowledge. Um, and so it's not yet
finalized. Um, it's something that, uh, the board and obviously
management is, is paying a lot of attention to, to make sure that
whatever the policy decision is made by the
policymakers, um, that, that it goes as well as
possible and that, that our role in that, you know, that, that whatever changes are
required, that we do that effectively.
So it's definitely something that's on our radar and not something that,
um, uh, we're treating at all lightly.
Um, as currently drafted and our interpretation of that,
so it's still, um, yet to be determined quite where it'll
land, is that there will be a, a significant financial impact on
AsureQuality but, um,
uh, uh, more importantly, you know, we're very
mindful of changes that would affect our employees.
We've got 600 and something people inv- involved in meat
inspection-
60.
Um,
and so we're paying a lot of attention to that to make sure
that, that we work through that in a proper way, um, but also that
there's an outcome which is good for New Zealand so......
you know, the, the financial impact will be significant for us.
But in, in some ways that's kind of the least of our worries.
The make s- the, the main thing that we're focused on is to make sure that it lands
well. So, although we're very conscious of
the, um, the, the, the, we're not in a position to
make policy and we're n- we're not a, a lobby organization, but
we do have some sub, where we have subject matter expertise, we
think there's, um, an important role for us to play in helping to inform
the consideration of matters like that.
So, we expect to be making a submission-
Mm-hmm.
... um, that, that will, um, draw on our subject matter expertise around the
practical operational aspects of it, um, to make s- to
help make sure that, that, um, that it lands well, whatever that will
be.
Yeah.
We're also, um, uh, anticipating and, and
have a lot of discussions underway with the meat companies-
Mm-hmm.
... to make sure that whatever the changes are, that we're all prepared,
uh, to, to implement those changes with a view to getting what the
meat companies tell us they want, which is flexibility,
um, efficiencies or, or, you know, the ability to, um,
update a system which has been in place for a long time, um,
and, um, and, and reduction of complexity if
it's, if it's unnecessary. Obviously, also keep markets open and things like
that.
Thank you, and thank you for, uh,
prioritizing the good of New Zealand, um, in, in the work that
you're doing on this. And, and on that point, I'm interested
in whether you've heard any feedback with, uh, your international
connections around, uh, concerns that if meat
processors were doing their own inspections, that there's some sort of conflict
of interest there and that the inspections might not be as, uh,
robust as they would be with an independent assessor?
We, we haven't heard anything. We, um, that said, you
know, we haven't gone out to seek that and-
Sure.
... that's not our role. Um, uh,
but, uh, w- you know, w- we would, we are focused and would be in the ordinary
course of events of just making sure that it lands in the, in the right way to
get what everybody wants, which is improvements to the system,
keep our markets open, keep the lines running, y- you know, to keep that,
that activity, uh, safe and productive.
The market would demand it.
And if it didn't run well, what would the consequence
be? The opposite of what you just said (laughs) ? Or...
Well, w- well, I would be actually speculating, but, but if, um, yeah,
if overseas markets were not happy, then-
Hm.
... say with, they would tell MPI and, and MPI and those markets consult
on these things and, you know, that, that would be for them to-
Who would pay for it?
Yep. And I, I imagine they've had some discussions already on that, so.
Thank you.
Steve and then Dave.
Yeah, thank you. With your, um, subject area expertise,
um, can you give us any sort of
broad brush headlines on what your submission might be in terms of
what, uh, we should be looking for as a committee
for concerns in the change?
Kim, perhaps if, if I defer to Kim-
Yeah.
... on some of that detail? Because it, it's a-
Mm-hmm.
... fairly complex document.
So, so.
And, uh, we're still working our way through it.
Yeah.
Yeah. What, what, um, what we hear from the meat
companies, and we're very much part of their operation 'cause we're on
all those sites, is they want a flexible
system that provides great food safety, um, which is
what we're renowned for, and where they have choice and optionality and,
um, and, and not to, um, add
cost.
Our submission will be along those lines of what we think
that, um, that, that will be provided with the way
??????? where we, we believe in the same thing.
We also are part of the meat industry.
We want an efficient, productive, thriving New Zealand red meat industry.
So that's where we start from, right?
So our feedback will be around things where we think that could
help improve
what's been proposed.
Mm-hmm.
Um, we think that there's some inf- that
inflexibility may, um, actually add cost, particularly for
smaller producers. So we're looking to, uh, provide
some feedback around, um, some tweaks that could be interesting or useful.
Yep. Dave? Thank you.
So, thank you. Um, first of all, well done with the, uh, monetary result
for, for the, the year. But the subject matter here, this
is, uh, we're talking about a third of your revenue.
This is significant, um, and, um,
this decision's largely out of your control, although you have, you have a, a place
to play in it. The being, being a third, you know, if it's, if it's
not, uh, uh-
(coughs)
... worst-case scenario, a substantial part of it, could be a big
significant drop in your revenue.
Can you just play out what you've done to
potentially play those scenarios out for the entity and what
that actually potentially means?
We, we've, um, definitely, um, developed a
number of scenarios going back a few months already when this was being
contemplated. It's been under discussion for some time.
So we've given it quite a lot of focus at the board table and, and obviously
a multiple of that around management.
Um, so we've, we've, we've modeled that.
We've, we've modeled our financial capacity to make the
adjustment. And, you know, as I mentioned before with, in the, in the
context of saying biosecurity incursions where you sort of have to ramp up and
then when, when the war is won or the battle is won, then you just sort of ramp
back down again because, you know, no one's paying us to carry capacity or, or to
pay the wages of, of people that don't have work to do.
So, um, we, we are, we, we
place a high store on our ability to, um,
remain resilient with the normal ebbs and flows of, of
the, the sectors that we work with.
Um, so we're confident in our,
um, our, um, banking covenants.
Yeah.
Um, our return on capital employed, we're aiming for
14%, uh, return on capital employed to be, you know, um,
after tax, um, providing a, an appropriate return, uh,
on the, the public's investment in our firm....
um, that would take a dent for a few years while we went through the adjustment
period. But we expect to get back to, back on top of that in about three
years.
Just another supplementary. In looking at your revenue, uh,
lines, it's, uh, come through meat services and it's
also comes significantly through food testing
services.
Mm-hmm.
And you mention the fact that that increases as a result of, uh,
customer focus. It sounds like a big headline.
Could you extrapolate that a bit more for us to understand-
Hmm.
... where that profitability has come from?
Yeah, look, I think, um, the, the focus on customers is because food
testing, as you mentioned, is a really big part of our business and, um,
there's a lot of competition in the market in laboratory testing.
Um, so we wanna remain the provider of choice, um, for those customers.
So, we, we've spent a lot of time working on and making sure that our
products and what we're providing is for, for purpose.
And that comes from the turnaround time.
So, if you're exporting out of New Zealand, you want those results as soon as
possible to get on a boat, especially if it's only about a month type thing.
So, su-... Turnaround times, um, the quality of what
we're providing, integrated reporting through data and, um, and
providing food assurance reports for particularly those with multiple sites
throughout New Zealand, um, those types of things are, have been, um,
key for our customers and why they're staying with us.
Um, so we think we provide a service that, um, that meets
those needs of our customers, not just today or yesterday, but what they want in
going forward.
Yeah.
Um, and it's important to, to maintain market share.
Mm-hmm.
Rachel.
Yeah. Just still on this point with looking at what your competitors are doing in a
way. So, the 17%, uh, that are the in-house
processors, have you done any analysis on,
on how that compares to the inspections that you
do?
Yes, um, we are involved in those, on those sites.
There's 17 that, um, did choose to go across to Company Meat Inspection
Model, or what we call the alternative post-mortem, uh, inspection model.
Yeah, yeah. (laughs)
Um, so we do work on their sites. We're quite familiar with how that works and
operates.
And what, what is, what is your analysis of how they work?
Well, I think it meets what the requirements are, um, for overseas
markets. We go through audits, um, we help a lot with those sites in
terms of the overseas delegations.
We form quite a strong role, um, with, um,
w- around the overall food safety system.
Our people engage a lot with the Company Meat inspectors in that
model.
Okay, thank you.
Very good. All right. Um, moving on.
I have a primary if you don't mind.
Yes, please.
So, um, six laboratories at the
moment, six locations. You've decided to, uh,
exit one of those locations, being here in Wellington.
Uh, a- are you removing a service? Are you just shifting the
service? Uh, or what is the relocation for what ??????
Yeah, we're moving the services we provide here in Wellington to Auckland.
And one of the key reasons is that Wellington, there isn't a lot of food companies
left really around here. There probably was once.
And, uh, so therefore, as I mentioned earlier, turnaround times and where those
samples are and where they come from is quite important.
So, Auckland can serve those customers, um,
the, if it's closer to many of those customers, particularly out of the bay, a lot
of it's residue testing from kiwifruit and things like that.
So, um, the service will move to, to Auckland and we'll manage
carefully that transition for our customers.
You've mentioned a s- a stage two, I think.
I think-
Yep.
... uh, what was it, about $13 million, a little bit over, which has been a very
successful project. So, it's on, on, on time and within budget,
which is all great news for any of those types of projects or stage two?
Or what-
So- ... switch it
?????
Mm-hmm. And, and if I may just to, to
add to Kim's, uh, answer to your, your previous question.
(clears throat)
Um, in, in terms of efficient use of capital, we were faced with needing to
spend a lot of money on the Wellington site at the same time as we
were, had already decided we, you know, we'd sweated the asset in Auckland as long
as possible and needed to do something there to keep up with, with the
requirements of, of, uh, the market and our customers.
So, um, after looking at it, we, we, we came to the
conclusion that it made much better sense, um, not only for
the reasons that, that the, um, Wellington laboratory
was originally established to be close to a number of customers who were here, who,
that n- that no longer applies 25 years later.
Um, but also, if we're gonna be doing something major in Auckland, we should do it
in a way that incorporated more efficiently, um, the space and the
facilities that could then accommodate the work that Wellington
had been doing.
Yeah, just one last supplem- just on the HR headlines.
Uh, redundancies, relocations, numbers in Auckland, total numbers
of the...
We, we have 100 people working in Wellington. Um, we've offered them...
That testing will still need to happen. They have the training.
We've offered them roles in, in Auckland and, um, that's
our first premise of the people we, if we can keep them, we would like to.
So, the numbers won't decrease as a whole?
I think people make their choice, um-
The, the, the problem would be some-
... (claps hands)
...in a sense, there'll usually be some-
Efficiencies.
...efficiencies just with co-location. You can better use it.
But we've given ourselves and, and given our, our
people, I think it was as long as three years, two and a
half years of lead time so that we and they could plan
together around that to make sure that it wasn't kind of like a bombshell or
something.
Thank you.
Rachel.
Yeah. So just to confirm, it's, uh, 100 jobs at Wellington that will
go and some of those jobs will be able to be shifted to Wellin-
to Auckland?
Uh, m- m- most of those roles, um, would, would,
um, need to be taken on in Auckland because there's
still a lot of work that, you know, that, that people are doing i- in Wellington.
Yeah.
And we have offered our staff in Wellington-...
support to transfer up to Auckland, should they wish to continue in
those roles at that location.
Yeah, okay. And, um, I, I, I understand your point that you made about
Wellington not having as many food companies as perhaps-
Mm-hmm.
... there once were in Auckland, and that they've got more.
But, um, are there other areas in the lower South
Island... Uh, I'm in my wrong i-
Shame.
... wrong, (laughs) wrong island-
(laughs) Actually-
... in the, in the North Island-
Yeah, that's it.
(laughs) ... um, that would-
Yes.
... use Wellington at the moment? Or...
Yeah, mo- most of our routine food testing is done in Auckland.
Mm.
So, Wellington actually does mainly come specialized, what we call
specialized testing.
Mm-hmm.
Uh, so it's very specific testing around pesticides and residues
and, and a few other things like aflatoxin and, and, and that.
So those, um, samples typically come
from, to Wellington from, from other places-
Mm-hmm.
... in South Island or, or further north.
So, when we looked at it, um, there were very few things that were coming
from lower North Island into that lab.
Um, but as Peter said, it's important...
Um, part of that decision was the fact that we had to spend quite a lot of money on
that facility, so that's when you really look at it and go, "Does this really make
sense to continue to spend more money on something that
doesn't probably create the right outcomes for our customers, um, and for our
business?"
Thank you.
Um, so with the f- other facilities, you're obviously
doing the, um, rebuild in stage two
now of, of the Auckland facility. Is there going to
have to be capital
outlaid for those other facilities in the near
future?
Probably, probably not from a, um, the, the, the...
In terms of age and s- and condition of the facilities.
Um, I think with continued growth in the food industry, we
always need to be, you know, looking at, at increases in capacity.
Sometimes that's, that's, um, can be accommodated within an existing
footprint. Just to, to clarify our, our,
um, main food testing laboratories are Auckland,
Wellington, and, uh, Christchurch in the South Island.
Um, probably South Island is, is the one where we're thinking, you know, it's quite
a big island and is (laughs)
It's-
And we-
... the East Island.
Yeah, I think we'd sort of-
(laughs)
... agree with you.
And, uh, and so, you know, you know, some of our customers would like us to be
closer rather than to rely on couriers and things like that.
Mm-hmm.
Um, but, you know, labs are very expensive assets, so we need to be...
So, that's probably one that would, that, um, we'd be turning our minds
to, but not any time soon. We haven't got any plans and it would be around
expansion rather than needing to upgrade what we've currently got.
Other laboratories we've got is a seed laboratory, which is in Lincoln.
Palmerston North.
Palmerston North, sorry. Um, uh, and, you know, that's a
relatively focused, uh, um,
laboratory that, um, we're getting the optical sorter, uh, to
go in there to save people having to count seeds on a-
Mm.
... on a plate by hand, and so get some efficiencies in there.
Works very closely with industry, so I, I don't envisage that that would be
something that would need any particular, um, you know, large
investment other than just keeping it going well.
Um, what other labs am I missing?
Lincoln Plant Health.
Oh, yeah. Plant Health. Again, it's a relatively small and specialized thing, so
we don't envisage any major spends on those being required.
And we don't own those buildings.
Mm-hmm.
Right. So, you're still the major provider of services
to the seed industry-
Yes.
... in New Zealand?
Yep.
Yes.
Or the only?
Um-
P- Um, PGG has a ce- a laboratory, so out
of in, um, by Lincoln there.
Yeah.
So, they can also do some of the work that we do as
well, some of the testing.
But w- we work very closely with them. It was interesting, you know, had a...
The board went down there and had a visit, um, not long ago, and, and,
um, impressed by how closely they work with the
industry, because it needs to be, you know, quite a good system for the industry as
a whole with the different things that they do in terms of, of the whole end-to-end
process, going into the field and verifying the right crop's being grown and
then the seed to, to ensure plant health at the other end and
certification for export. So, that, um, I think is a
good, well sort of integrated model with the wider
industry.
We'll go to Rachel for for for our group.
Yeah. So, going back to meet-
I'll come back to you about some of that stuff.
Oh, well, this, you might have answered this one, too.
You're going back to meat industry, and, um, you mentioned at the start
using more tools and AI and
the like.
Mm.
How, how does... What does that mean for
inspection and, um, and then
maybe, is there a difference between the, what
you do and what an in-house processor would do or how you'd work with it as well?
If you can take us through that.
Yeah, look, I think, um, inspection is an area
that's ripe for technology. And if you think about it, for a lot of
our people, if you're inspecting something visually, um, it's
actually, needs a lot of concentration.
Um, and it can be, when you're not finding something for, for a while, and
depending on what you're looking at, whether it's meat or seed or, or petri
dishes, um, it's not very gratifying, right?
So, we've been working for some time with the union
on bringing in, um, cameras that can actually
look at a carcass. And we started with bovine and we're now in ovines.
We're in
six, uh, six chains, four plants with this
technology, which effectively can take an image of the carcass and work out
whether there's d- disease or defect.
And our people have helped train the model behind,
um, picking that up to quite a high level of accuracy.
Mm-hmm.
Um, so our people are quite excited about this because it enables them to have
different work as well, where they can look at exceptions that are
identified as opposed to having 100% inspection on the chain and then,
you know, um...... so, you know, with the conditions that they work in.
And so, I think that it's positive for our people, positive for the
industry, and it can actually, you know, um, identify,
um, at a, at a really good level. And I think, um, the regulators
have been really interested in this.
We've been talking about it with the MPI, with the UK, with Australia.
Um, so I think it's really... and the technology is moving really fast, so we're
quite excited about it.
So, that, that technology... and thank you for explaining that...
would that be owned by AsureQuality, and
therefore if processors were doing their own things, would they still
have to use AsureQuality to be able to utilize that
technology? Or do you think-
Yeah.
... the technology is such that they'd have their own?
Um, well, the one that I'm referring to is-
Yeah.
... owned by us. And, I think the benefit is, and why we're further ahead perhaps
than other countries, because we know porcine has been looked at in the UK-
Mm-hmm.
... um, but because our people, uh, the inspectors, they do most of the meat
inspection in this country, they understand the design defect and have huge
amounts-
... of experience. So they've been able to be, uh, um, involved in
labeling, which teaches the model of what they're
finding. And if you can imagine, um,
that A, make sure you've got a model that works, but also that they're also
involved with to see if there's exceptions and they're, they're bought into the
whole, um, the program. In, in the
proposal, you still need an official assessor, um, or
government oversight in the, in the, in the proposed model.
So this oversight would still come from our people, but potentially be,
um, have, um, augmented with
technology.
If it-
(coughs) If I may, uh, uh, I, um, having spent some time in the horticulture
industry see it as, as somewhat analogous to, um,
apple pack sheds, where defect sorters used to do it by hand and
now it's done with, with visioning and including internal defects.
It's, it's very similar to that.
(clears throat)
Um, so it can be used both for, from a compliance point of view, looking at,
at, um, uh, uh, from a meat inspection point of view, but it could
also readily lend itself to improving cut
accuracy, so getting a yield gain for meat
companies. So, it's still in the trial stages, it's,
um, just to be, to be clear on it. That's something that, that
we're, uh, as Kim mentioned, we're working with.
We've asked a number of companies and they've agreed to have these things in, in
their sites on a trial basis to sort of prove that it work-, if it works,
that it works.
Okay.
And it will be part of our submission, that we think there's a, there should be a
role for technology for future-proofing.
Who are you working with on this? What tech
company?
The, the, um... there's a few bits and pieces.
There's, there's an AI component-
Okay.
... um, where you, you, you know, you train up the, the optical, sort of.
The optical part of it is, is off the shelf.
It's, it's, that's where one of the technology enablers has, has kind of
made this much more practical, um, to be able to give it a go and, and
see. Um, and then there's, there's a few kind of specialist
electrical installers-
Oh,
okay. ... that put the gear in. So it's relatively, um-
(coughs)
... the, the, the hardware of it is, is,
um, not something that we're looking to develop.
It's more, um, training up a system so that it's
reliable, repeatable, meets requirements, auditable, that sort of thing.
I had visions of Scott Technology in there, uh-
Yes. (laughs)
(laughs) ... and stuff that's in the, the meatworks now, which is-
Mm-hmm. And, and you know, we, we, um...
to kind of follow up again Kim's point, we haven't yet...
we're still in the, in the, um, final stages of, I think we're beyond proof of
concept, but just wanting to make sure that this thing works at a, at a commercial
scale, hence the trials with companies.
Um, we haven't yet figured out exactly how this would be
implemented and it would need, um, enabling changes
to, to regulations, uh, under the...
to, to, to happen-
Uh-
... so there's a, there's a, some steps ahead of us.
Yeah. A lot of water to go under the bridge yet. Steve.
(clears throat) I wonder what consideration you've had to the
investment in that, um, new technology in light
of the likely changes coming and,
um, yeah, how that reconciles with,
um, a potential reduction in your
workload?
Well,
I guess our, our view is, is if we go back to what we are looking for is a
f- a, a, a flexible meat inspection system that has productive, that,
um, uh, ensures we've got a thriving exporting industry.
So if we start from that point, uh, and as I mentioned, that's what our feedback
will be on.
Mm-hmm.
We think, um, we think people should have choice-
Yeah.
... um, for what they choose to do. And we'd also like to use and have
technology be considered, um, as part of that.
Um, at the moment, it, um, it doesn't consider that.
Um, so in terms of our investment, we see that this is, um,
something that will happen or if, if it's driven by New Zealand or driven outside
of New Zealand, it will happen.
Mm-hmm.
Um, we would like to think, um, given we have been
really instrumental here in New Zealand of leading food safety, that we will,
um, be able to lead the way in, in this type of technology out of New Zealand.
That would be really exciting, so-
And, and probably just another angle on perhaps your
question. Um, this is somewhat neutral with regard
to any changes in, um, um, the number of inspectors or who does
the inspection. It would simply mean instead of people needing to stand on the line
with a sharp knife either side of them from, from people doing,
doing, uh, you know, butchers on the line or whatever, that they could in fact be,
um, alongside the line watching for exceptions on the
screen and then going to the detaining rail and things like that.
So it, it's somewhat neutral, uh, to the, the changes
that are envisaged under the, um, draft, uh, export
notice.
Yeah, so it's not a sort of single big bit of kit that, um, needs to
be... has a massive cost that has to be justified by a certain
volume of meat.
... it, it, yeah, I would just, um, add to, in the same way
that the Scott Technology's automation has gone into lines
to, to remove manual repetitive or,
um, you know, hesitas- like, head looking and things like that,
um, this would be a way of, of, um, uh,
providing a tool to do some of the, um, up-close
manual inspection with something that could be monitored and
assisted with the technology.
So, you sort of allude to it being us innovating in that
space. Is it something that could be a, uh,
technology
effect to some extent and-
Licensed.
... could be, yeah, licensed or-
Yes, that's, that's the idea.
Right.
We would like to, um, we believe we have something really interesting that we could
potentially license out to, to other countries.
Mm-hmm. Cool.
Um-
Yeah, sure.
... Quality was asked at one point if we're interested in, um, doing meat
inspection in, in the UK. We were seen, um, as being a really,
uh, really good, providing a really good service for meat inspection.
And, uh, so we got asked about that, which is, um, you know, we're thinking, well,
how, how about taking some of the technology?
We're not interested in putting people on the ground or boots on the ground.
That's not our role in the UK. But, um, potentially, yeah, there could be
technology to be licensed.
And, and if I, if I may, um, in, in case anyone's wondering,
a couple of things, our, our investment in, in this is relatively
modest because as I mentioned, we're not developing new kit or technology.
Yeah.
It's just put it together and use the knowledge-
It's
a model. ... that's currently in peoples' heads about how to identify disease or
defects-
Yeah.
... and get a system that will reliably, uh, do that and then being able to
monitor it.
It-
Um, secondly, that, that, um, at the point at which it, it starts to
require more significant investment to deploy and, and scale
up a, a full kind of, um, release of this and into
service and maintain it, we don't see that as being the core business of a sure
quality. We would see our business as being to provide some of the brains behind it
in terms of expert knowledge on meat inspection and being able
to provide quality assurance around that, but not nece- not, not really being an
operator of, of machines and, and sites.
And then, um, the, the other point of, if you indulge
me for a second is, you might be wondering, why would we give this sort of thing
away to other countries? I mean, or, or, or to make it commercially available to
other countries? Part of the rationale for that would be if other
countries had this in their own plants, then they would have to accept it in
our exports.
Mm-hmm.
So it's a way of it becoming the new standard for meat inspection that's accepted
around the world. So it, it kind of helps to-
Helps to knock your-
... pave the way.
(laughs) Yeah.
If, if farmers can see damages of why their stock might have been
downgrade or, you know, I think that would be really useful.
A lot of our inspectors get rung, um, by farmers around the regions around
what, what it was, why did they get, you know, a rung that it came through and got
downgrade. So that we think providing the images and also holding those on record
for
Yeah.
... delegations to, to be able to check and provides evidence that
inspection, physical inspection doesn't.
Yup.
So, yeah, lots of benefits and-
Good
answer. ... so we're hopeful that that will-
Yeah.
... kind of work something.
Will it add any cost to the processing of the meat?
No, I think the, um, opposite. I think it's-
It will make it cheaper.
I, I think it makes it more productive and that's-
Just the cost for the pro- processor by taking away labor units
and-
Yeah, I,
I- Yeah. ... believe there's efficiencies in the system, which
is, you know, that's where we started with.
We would like a really efficient, productive inspection system.
At the moment we have scale because we go across the whole country, right?
And we think the answer is over, over time, once this technology
becomes
Mm.
... point is to, to bring this in and then you, you know, a lot of, you're
actually going down in numbers of inspectors.
So this, you know, with technology, and us
inspectors, which sounds odd, and the union are very on bo-
uh, board with this because it's better work.
Mm-hmm.
And, um, it still complies because you've still got an official assessor, but you
haven't got everybody, you know, 100% inspector.
Well, it's presumably you wouldn't have to stop the chain as
often-
Right.
... because those carcasses could be identified and put straight into the detainer
without
stopping the processing.
Yeah, well, we haven't got to a point of modeling how it works, how that is.
Yeah, yeah, but that, that would be what you'd be-
But ultimately, you would be seeing, um, you
know, a lot at the moment, um, y- you know, the
system is that you've got people and if they're not there, like if something
happens, heaven isn't, you've got to stop the chain and go off, right?
If you've got a piece of equipment, it doesn't have a, a-
Smoker break.
It doesn't go to the bathroom. It doesn't have a smoker break.
It doesn't have a cut finger. Yeah.
So there's efficiencies around, um, doing this.
And, but what our people really like is it still requires
a human expertise to be able to sign off that that is
correct-
Yeah.
And it's higher order work, right?
And that's what we want for our people is higher order work.
Um, 100% inspection standing on a chain isn't, isn't the future
surrounded by knives, right? That, so I, that, that's why we're passionate as you
can see-
(laughs)
... about this and we think that it would, um, it,
Quite a brutal place to work, the old chain.
What was it, sorry?
(laughs) Quite a brutal place to work.
If you've been-
On the chain.
Yeah, it is, it is, right?
(laughs)
Exactly. So I think, um, this, this ticks-
Sorry.
... a number of boxes and we'd love for there to be a role in technology and meat
inspection in the future and that's AQ's position.
And I guess, I guess ultimately it's going to be, uh, who you see first, isn't it?
Because there will be other...
Countries.
Businesses in countries around the world trying to do exactly the same thing, won't
they? It's inevitable.
Mm-hmm.
I mean, we've got all that AI in our, um, health sector now.
And in some cases, it's actually more accurate than the human and can pick it up
quicker as well. So there's a whole lot of advantages.
It's a race race really.
And I think our advantage at AQ, because we've often thought about this, what's our
advantage to win, which is-
... is because our meat inspectors are so, so many are very passionate about this
project and want it to be successful so that we are the meat providers of choice,
right? So they are keen to teach the model and that's probably one of the big
differences.
Yeah.
In other direct versus you've got to ask people to teach and so you, you know, in,
in the UK with the vets and others, you've got a bit of resistance
perhaps. Um, so we say that we could have a point of
difference because our people are on board with-...
with this program work.
Excellent. Sue?
Wh- what's the average age of a meat inspector? Like, does it change?
Is th- are they getting older too?
Um-
So, is it gonna make it... Is it gonna help that, in terms of-
Y- we do have an aging-
... accession planning, if that's what you call it?
We do have an aging workforce, but we also have a lot of women and
wahine Maori coming into these roles as well.
Like, it's actually quite a, a, a good role where people see that they can get an
NZQA qualification and move up. So, in the provinces, that's been actually quite
popular. So, we're seeing a shift from, I don't know if I can say this, but
they'll be-
Go ahead.
My boss will tell me off later.
No.
But from perhaps older-
I wouldn't-
... older white male.
Stay with the male panel.
(laughs) No, but I wasn't gonna say that.
I was just gonna say older white males-
We know. (laughs)
Others do.
... to, to, to, to females, uh, and a different, um,
person but, um, that, uh... So, we don't actually have
recruitment issues of meat inspectors.
Um, however, um, over time, I think young people don't want
to do a role that stands on a chair and looks at a carcass all day.
They want to-
Hm. ... work with technology.
Hm.
So, I don't know about your teenagers, if you've got kids, but, um, that's what my
teenagers, th- they would want to work with tech.
So, I think this future-proofs the workforce as well.
None of ours do (laughs) . Thanks for that, um,
we'll move on to another primary here from Dave.
So, just in a bit of a different direction, and this is moving on to, uh, your
investment in Australia, and there's been a change, uh, you've
got a different, uh, uh... I wouldn't even try and pronounce
the-
Murio. Murio.
Murio, thank you (laughs) . Um-
It's
So, with this, uh, uh, new partnership, uh, with this new
entity, um, what's the, is there any change in the risk
profile of that investment for you, with th- their partner?
Uh, secondly, uh, aspirations for growth in
Australia to keep that business
growing or potentially even outside of the Australian
market?
Yeah.
So, in terms of Joe's question, so, um,
Murio's a, a very good partner for us.
So, not a funny story, but a true story.
10 years ago when we partnered with BV, um, we
originally went out and did a risk assessment around the world of who was the best
to partner with and actually had Murio as our first
choice.
Um, so a very good company to work with.
Uh, very collaborative. Um, and we've got equal voting
rights
so we don't see any change in risk profile,
more a increase in opportunities.
Um, so as part of this
new joint venture, we actually merged their existing business in
Australia, so we basically doubled the amount of labs we've had-
Thank you.
... yep, in Australia. So, now they're clear market leader.
So, in terms of growth, I guess we'll be growing with the
market, as the market leader. And in terms of getting
opportunities, it's, it's really the synergies we can get from
consolidating all those labs,
um, 'cause most of them are duplicated in each city in
Australia.
Excellent.
Um, yeah, in terms of expanding outside of Australia with that
joint venture, that's not a plan.
Um, Southeast Asia, then?
Yep. So, we've got a joint venture with the same company in Southeast
Asia.
Okay.
Um, so similar arrangements. So, we've got labs in Singapore, Thailand,
Vietnam-
Perfect.
... Philippines and Malaysia. Um, so
again, lots of opportunity to grow.
So, one of the things that Murio's brought to the partnership is they have a lot of
global key accounts
and all those customers and manufacturers in Southeast Asia had
previously been sending their food testing overseas to Europe,
um, they can now put it through those joint venture labs.
So, that's where the big growth opportunity is, in Southeast Asia for
us.
If I may, um, so
you can organically grow-
Mm-hmm.
... and you can also grow by acquisition as well.
Um, y- you mentioned about scale is-
Yes.
... is the future of a sector. Um, is that
within your strategy potentially here in New Zealand-
No. ... or indeed in that business overseas?
Yeah. So, so, in terms of scale in Australia, we are the biggest,
so there's not much opportunity to scale any further.
In terms of Southeast Asia, we've got capacity in our existing
labs to grow quite a bit.
Um, so again, we weren't looking at, at doing any particular M&A.
We're really about growing the existing business we've got.
Um, and in regards to New Zealand, uh, we're probably the market leader as
well, so quite difficult to scale through M&A.
But if, if, um... So, we haven't got
anything, um, any kind of plans for, for
acquisition? Um, other than, you know, a few
staff might join here or there, we might, you know...
Which is not, not necessarily by acquisition.
No.
Um,
the board would look carefully at
any expansion for the footprint of those overseas
investments, and it comes back to, you know, what's the rationale
for us as a state-owned enterprise to be involved in those things?
And, and it comes back to, um, underpinning
or providing services that support the New Zealand food and primary industries.
So, um,
we established those, um, laboratories out there initially on our
own with New Zealand exporters who wanted us to be there-
Mm-hmm.
... to provide in-market testing for them, particularly where they had processing
activities outside New Zealand.
Okay.
Um, but also in some cases for, um, doing cross-checking their
customer up to results of things that, that had
arrived. Um, so that was, that's kind of the, the main thing to
sort of support New Zealand customers right through there, those two particular
markets of importance for them. Secondly, um,
the, it's, it's, um, a bit like if, if, um, the All Blacks or,
or, or the, um, White Ferns didn't play football internationally, they wouldn't be
as good as they could be. So, for us being, operating out there with
all of the international competitors that exist in all those different markets and
all of the, the big and all different customers that exist, it helps us to
make, to be at the forefront of food assurance to make sure that we're keeping up
with all the different trends that both customers and competitors have.
Um-... and, um, and thirdly, by being actually
in, having, uh, having a, some, uh, activity in those
markets, that helps us to have firsthand knowledge of markets that are very
important to our New Zealand customers.
So we see that fitting with our, our core purpose.
But, but, um, also it's gotta wash its face financially,
and, and so, um, another important aspect of it is making sure that it provides at
least, if not better, financial return than our activities here in New
Zealand. And, and so far, it, it does and, and we would expect that to
continue.
A bigger risk is, uh, tech- oh , technology
disruption. You, you, we assume that your technology in
the, uh, in the meat work sector is, is quite
advanced. That would be an assumption, and, and you
never know. There could be someone, some international that has
efficiencies that could come into New Zealand and provide an offering that you
couldn't meet. So do you, do you, do you, how do you keep a,
a, an eye on the horizon?
Yeah, there's probably another advantage of this partnership.
So Mireo's the second-biggest food assurance business
in the world. So they've got 144 labs,
um, and obviously spending a lot on technology.
So through our partnership with them, we get access to those
trends, you know, at pace. And that's one
of the, another key reason for the partnership.
Yeah.
Yeah. What, what we've seen in terms of, of, um,
uh, impact of, of technology is,
um, s- sort of smaller, more nimble
competitors here in the New Zealand market that come out with a better app that
provides good customer service in a particular area of our
business. And, um, so that's part of where we needed to
get some of our systems and, and clunky processes brought
up, up to speed to respond to that. So that's why I mentioned it as
one of the investments we've been making.
Um, and, um, but in other aspects, we've
probably often been in the lead
in adopting technology. Um-
There you are.
... uh, for example, we, the plate, automated plate counting that we
have at our Auckland laboratory, so instead of someone getting a microscope out
and, you know, counting (laughs) uh, little spots on a, on a Petri disc,
we got a piece of kit, um, and then had to
adapt it with, uh, machine learning so that it could be trained up to
accurately, to the right standards, um, uh, count those, those things
and do that sort of, again, higher, higher, high level
work, um, for employees. So that was something that we were one
of the first, if not the first.
Right.
And so Mireo kind of see it as being very much a two-way thing.
Yeah.
They're very happy to share with us, for example, some of their test
methodologies that we don't have for some of the ones that we're involved in
developing .
Very good. So your, um, Southeast
Asian holdings come a long way in two
years, because it was impaired a,
a bit, uh, two years ago. You're in, in the profit
now. Um, and firstly,
congratulations on that, because no one likes to see a government
business losing money. Um,
h- have... Are you satisfied with where that is
sitting?
Um,
could you do better?
So, I mean, the strategy is, is growth.
So we've had double-digit growth over the last 12
months. The strategy is to continue that.
Um, so we expect to continue to grow it.
So yes, we will get better through
scale.
Okay. And in Australia, you had a loss.
Yep.
Um, and is that because of your spending on
growth as well?
That, that is two things. So it's,
um, to do with the integration of our new
partner. So we had effectively five labs.
They had four. So we're effect- be closing half of them
down.
Okay.
So there's costs associated, one-off costs associated with that.
Yeah.
And the other thing we've been doing in Australia is, is building, that company's
been building a new lab in Melbourne.
Um, so there's some one-off costs associated with that.
So we would expect them to turn around.
And the underlying profit is very good.
Um-
And you forecast to go back into profit when in Australia?
Yeah. So we've still got, um, integration costs
coming through for the next few months.
So we'll start making profit, um, probably in the,
the second quarter of next year. Um, and there's
lots of... As I tried to explain before, there's lots of synergies.
So in terms of consolidating those labs, there's,
uh, yeah, a lot of funds in terms of, um, savings
with economies of scale, um, that we can
recognize. But yeah, we have to go through the, the hard
process first.
And, and just to add to that, um, uh, certainly not in, in
any recent years, we haven't tipped any money into those.
Yeah.
So it hasn't drawn on, on capital. It's been entirely funded
itself and with debt. And also, in fact, we, we are net recipients of
cash from those operations through service level agreements and things
like that. So, um, it, it's, um, the board's
satisfied with it from a financial point of view, that we shouldn't be taking any
risk. And, and we're not.
Very good. Thank you. Any further
questions?
No, I'm good, thank you.
No? Well, it seems we've come to the end of...
Thank you very much.
You're very welcome.
Thank you. Thank you all.
Yeah, thanks for the really good questions.
Yeah. Best of luck, Levin.
Uh, thank you.
Yeah.
Have a happy day.
Thank you. I guess you'll all be looking forward to a break after a big y-
busy year for everybody, right? (laughs)
(laughs) Yeah. Christmas can't come fast enough this
evening.
(laughing)
Thank you.